both past and present, First National Bank proudly sponsors Veterans of the Valley.
Since 1862, First National has provided local decision-making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
First National Bank.
First, always.
[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
The path that Lawrence DeZavala took from his birthplace in Louisiana to his vineyards near New Baden included three years of service as a radio operator gunner, flying some 21 combat missions with the Air Force's 379th bomber group.
Their mission aboard their B-24 was to take out rail yards and bridges in Austria and other positions near the war's end.
He counts himself lucky to have returned uninjured.
Counts himself even more fortunate to have lived the life he's lived.
He and Rachel, his wife of 62 years, own and operate DeZavala Vineyards,
where some of the tastiest blackberries, blueberries, raspberries can be picked.
We welcome Lawrence DeZavala to Veterans of the Valley.
Thank you for your service and thank you for being here, Lawrence.
I want to go back.
You were born in Gretna, Louisiana.
You soon came to Texas with your family.
Sort of take us from there.
You came to Houston.
Your dad eventually went to work for Dow.
Sort of take us from there in your youth, going to high school in Freeport and eventually getting into the service.
Sort of take us to that time.
All right.
went to Freeport High School and I graduated in 1942 after the war had started in December 7th, of course.
And then my intention was to go to college.
Also, I was going to be drafted and so
Instead of joining up when I was 17 years old, my father suggested that, and I've got a boy so I can understand his feelings.
I decided to work on construction for a year or so until just before I turned 18.
Then I went and volunteered for the Air Force.
Yes, sir.
I didn't think I wanted to be in the infantry and do all that walking.
Right.
I joined the Air Force.
They told me I wanted to get into navigation and be a navigator.
They told me that they weren't calling them up very fast and just go back home and enjoy life.
Well, I went back home, and three weeks later, they called me up.
I trained and took my basic at Wichita Falls, Shepherd Field.
And then during that time, they give you all kinds of physicals, and I failed one of my physicals.
So I couldn't be a navigator, but I could be a gunner.
So they said I had an aptitude for code and radio.
So I went to radio school in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
Right.
And that was in the winter of 1944, January of 44.
I never will forget, I'd never been too far out of Texas, and we stopped for, I was layover in Omaha, Nebraska in the wintertime, and there was cold smoke everywhere, and when you blew your nose, it was black.
And I just, old Southern boy just didn't understand that.
It was a little too cold for you.
A little too cold, but I stayed in Sioux Falls for six months, graduated from radio school, and then in the hot summer, I went to Yuma, Arizona for gunnery.
Right.
And that was 110 to 120.
Just the opposite.
And so just the opposite.
Right.
But Sioux Falls, South Dakota was gorgeous and beautiful in the spring.
We really enjoyed it during that period of time.
Right.
You eventually went to California.
Yes.
And you thought at the time, because you had taken a train up to Hamilton Field in San Francisco, you were pretty sure you were going to be stationed in the Pacific, but they kind of pulled a switch on you, right?
They sure did.
We made crews up in California and then went for operational training.
That's where you train as a crew for 90 days.
It's one day on the ground training and one day in the air training until you finish operational training.
And that's when they sent us to San Francisco.
And man, we're going to the Pacific.
And we got to Frisco.
They gave us all
heavy wool clothing and put us on a train and shipped us to Newport News, Virginia eight days later.
And you knew something was up, right?
That was quite a trip, I'll tell you.
Then they put us aboard the SS West Point.
And we went alone across the Atlantic.
Right.
Only took us, I think, about six days going.
We landed in Naples.
And in Naples, then, we were assigned as replacement crews for those that had been lost in the 15th Air Force.
Right.
I was assigned to the 379th Bomb Group.
And from there, we flew...
21 missions into Austria, into Germany, into Yugoslavia.
We were stationed in the heel of the boot west of Brindisi.
We'd take off and get in formation and go up the middle of the Adriatic until we got at some predetermined point where the navigator says turn, and then we turned inland to go to our target.
Right.
Talk more about your mission.
I referred to it a little bit, but your mission was mainly to cut off their supplies, to cut off their ability to travel by taking out bridges and taking out rail yards.
Yes.
You can imagine a...
Linz, Austria was a large town.
Vienna, Austria was a tremendous town with rail yards all around the place.
And so there were lots of targets and Vienna was a tough target.
You flew there.
We never did get jumped by fighters, but we withstood flak on almost every trip.
We considered ourselves, if we didn't hear or see flak, we considered ourselves very lucky.
Now, people who don't know flak, those come from ground guns.
That was an anti-aircraft gun on the ground set to explode at a certain elevation in the sky.
And in order to confuse the Germans on that elevation,
One of my jobs was to drop this, what they call chaff, out of a hole in the side of the airplane, and it was nothing more than strips of tinfoil, which reflected their radar and gave them false senses of elevation.
I see.
So they'd zero in on that and then hopefully miss us, which they did on that kind of a basis.
So these would be like strips of tinfoil that you would just put out about every minute?
In a little box, and we'd throw them out every minute.
If the flak was heavy, we'd throw them out a little faster.
And the idea is that would mess up their radar.
Yes, and give them a false reading on their elevation.
Of where you were.
Of where they could aim to.
Right, so the flak would explode where you weren't.
That's right.
That was the idea.
That is correct.
But sometimes you got hit by some flak.
Yes, we got hit by flak.
It rattled around the inside of your plane.
If you saw the black smoke through the flak,
You didn't worry, but if you saw the red fire or the explosion, then you were pretty close to it, and sometimes the shrapnel would come through both sides of the airplane, and you'd hear it going through both sides.
Right.
And so sometimes we'd get a little afeared, and we wore flax suits, which were nothing more than steel pieces mounted in a vest that you put over your head and protected your upper part of your body.
And there was a flak suit in the back, and we'd put those on.
And once you rallied, after the bombs were dropped, one of my jobs was to let the ball turret gunner down into his ball for fighter protection.
We were, as I say, I think very fortunate we didn't ever get jumped by fighters.
We were protected with fighters by the Tuskegee black pilots and they were terrific.
Wanted to talk about that because that's fascinating, especially to me because I've read the books and seen the movie about the Tuskegee Airmen.
and and what they did and they were they were protection uh for for b24s like like yourself. They were extreme protection. We love to see them. They had uh black and white checkered tails if I remember correctly and we always were very happy when we saw them at a distance and they generally stay above us four to five thousand feet waiting for something to jump us in case it did. Right. The uh fighters left us when we went
on the bomb run because you had to fly straight and narrow, and that's when the flak was the worst.
So they'd leave us, and then they'd pick us up after we finished the bomb run on the rally and escort us back.
They were flying out of northern Italy, and we were flying out of southern Italy in the heel of the boot.
So you didn't really get a chance to meet them, but you knew them by what they did.
That's right.
We knew them by what they did.
Exactly.
And so we were proud of them.
Your position on the B-24 was in the waist of the airplane.
Yes, I was in the open waist window.
Right.
Some of them had plexiglass coverings there, but most of them are open.
We had twin .50 caliber machine guns.
Both of them were electric heated by the system of the airplane.
Heaters on top at 20 to 25 below zero, that oil gets pretty heavy and you don't want it messing up.
Right.
Your job was once you got clear,
was to test fire your guns to be sure they were operable.
Pilot would tell you when, and so you'd just fire a short burst just to be sure they're operable, and then leave it that way until you rallied back and were flying back home, then you took the shells out.
Right.
Most of your early missions you flew at, what, 20,000 feet or so?
15 to 20,000 feet?
No, most of them were at 20 to 22.
22,000 feet.
But you talked about near war's end.
You'd get down to missions where you were flying at 10 and 12,000 feet.
We were fine at ground protection or ground harassment of the enemy as the Germans were retreating in northern Italy.
Our job was to drop what they call proximity bombs, which exploded about 50 foot off the ground.
and for devastating for ground troops.
And so we didn't fly but about 10 to 12,000 feet.
And so that made our job tougher because we were much closer to their anti-aircraft.
Right.
And you were in more harm's way of flying that low.
And your thought was, I'm going to be going home here before long.
You didn't want this thing to end badly towards the end of the war.
Normally, when we first got over there, we would have flown every day if given the opportunity.
But they had so many pilots, so many crews, and a few airplanes.
Of course, they'd have to repair the airplanes, but they had lots of crews.
So we flew about every three days.
and then toward the end of the war we could see it ending and then it kind of got frustrating with we got a little bit of fear into us and saying what if we get shot down then the day before the war is over. That's pretty horrendous. Right so we weren't quite that eager toward the end, but it was over and we were very thankful our pilot and co-pilot decided to
Oh, within two weeks after the war was over that he got an opportunity to fly a brand new airplane back to the States.
Right.
So he asked all of us if we'd like to stay with him or we could stay over there and take a ship back.
And we said, no way.
Let's go.
Let's fly home.
So we flew home, flew to Africa.
Flew to the Azores, flew to Newfoundland, and then into Connecticut where we landed.
And from there, I was sent to Fort Sam Houston for a 30-day furlough.
And my girlfriend and I decided to get married.
Yes.
So we got married.
You'd already given her an engagement ring before you went over.
I'd given her an engagement ring the Christmas before.
Right.
And so we were engaged.
And so we decided to get married.
And it was a little difficult for me.
I was Catholic and she was not.
In those days, Catholic couldn't get married in a Protestant church.
And the Protestants couldn't get married in the Catholic church.
Mm-hmm.
So we told a good padre to come to her mother's backyard.
And she had lots of flowers and everything.
And so we...
We got married in our backyard.
The other problem was to find the best man that was a Catholic, but a good friend of mine was home on furlough also.
He'd been in the Air Force, so he stood in for me.
And 62 years later, you and Rachel are living here in the Brazos Valley and operating, like we said, your vineyard.
And we're going to see some pictures, a couple that you have and a couple that I took the other day when I was out at your place.
of parts of your vineyard too.
And we're gonna be talking a lot about that in the second half of the show.
Let's go ahead and go to just a few pictures that we have here that Mr. DeZavala has given us.
There we go.
You're about 19 years old in this picture.
I was 19 years old.
So you were young and just, this was I guess before you went overseas, right?
Yes.
Good-looking airman right there.
Thank you.
You bet.
Now, here's a B-24 that I came up with.
This is the Liberator.
The waist gunner, I guess, was what?
You can't really see it in this picture.
About where that star is on the side.
That's where the waist gunner is.
Right behind the wing.
Of course, the nose gunner was up front.
Yeah, tail gunner was in the rear, then they had an upper turret gunner, which is above the 9-1.
You can see there, that's an upper turret.
Right.
There were six enlisted men and four officers on every plane.
Quite an aircraft, quite a steady aircraft.
Yes.
This was taken a couple of years ago in celebration of your 60th wedding anniversary taken out at your farm, and that's you and your beautiful wife, Rachel.
I really don't know why I couldn't maintain my svelte look when I was 19.
I ballooned.
I got a couple of pictures here that I was able to take the other day.
This is the sign right there on Highway 79, headed out beyond New Baden, beyond Franklin.
And that's the sign.
And in the background, you can see part of the vineyards that you grew on the highway.
We're going to talk about your vineyards here coming up.
All right.
You can see that.
And then I've got another shot of some of the vineyards there that's on the highway.
And that's just a part of what you all have.
Yeah, that's about an acre on the highway.
We've got about another four acres there up by the house.
Right, right.
And it's a beautiful place.
I've been out there, and it's great.
I want to talk now about after the war.
You came home June of 1945, and you did get married.
I guess you got married in San Antonio.
Is that right?
No, no.
I got married in Freeport.
In Freeport.
Okay.
But you went honeymooning in Kerrville.
Went honeymooning in Kerrville, and when we got to the Heart of the Hills Inn in Kerrville, there were six other honeymoon couples there.
And we knew one of the couples.
So it was after the war, so getting married was quite a popular thing.
Well, the war was still on in the Pacific.
Right.
And then from after the end of my furlough, I went to California to be reassigned, and I had enough combat hours to
That eliminated me from at the present time of going to be trained in 29.
Right.
So I was sent back as permanent party to Victoria, Foster Field in Victoria, Texas.
That's a fighter base, right?
That's a fighter base.
And my job then was I worked evenings, checked out all the radios and the fighters.
Right.
Every night because they were still training fighter pilots there.
And you had 90 points because you got five points for each of the combat missions that you had flown while you were in Italy, so you were able to get out in October of 1945.
You were discharged.
Yes, I was discharged in October, and I wanted to be a...
A metallurgical engineer, and there were two schools in Texas that offered it.
One was A&M, and the other was University of Texas at El Paso.
I guess it was called Texas Western back then, is that right?
It was called, yes.
No, no, it was called College of Mines and Metallurgy.
That's right, that's right.
Texas Western came later.
I wasn't going back far enough.
Texas Western came later, that's right.
I had had enough of the service.
I did not want to come to A&M because I understood that I did not have to join the Corps, but I felt that if you're going to be an Aggie, you need to be in the Corps because that is the spirit of A&M.
Right.
And so we decided to go to El Paso.
Didn't know a soul.
Drove out there.
My wife got a job.
We got an apartment, and I went to school there four and a half years.
Right.
And you got out, and you were looking for a job.
You had a little trouble getting a job initially.
Oh, yeah.
In 1949, things were pretty tough.
Right.
In fact, you'd been offered a job in Utah, and they gave it to somebody else and kind of slipped the rug out from under you.
But you eventually got a job in El Paso.
It was there just for about four months when you got to go home to Freeport and work for Dow.
I got an offer from Dow in December of 1949.
And so we went back home basically to Dow.
Haven't regretted it a bit.
I've enjoyed every minute of it.
You worked for Dow for 34 and a half years.
34 and a half years.
And a great career there.
And you told me that over those years, besides the salary that you made, they also offered you stock in Dow, and you took it every chance you got.
Well, they offered stock at a reduced rate, and you could pay it off on a 10-month installment.
Right, right.
And because of that, you were able to buy your farm.
I buy my farm up there, 315 acres.
We bought that with...
paid the down payment, which got it down where we can handle it with the Dow stock.
I still have some Dow stock left.
Well, that's good.
Hold on to it.
And that's what I want to go to now because I was able to come out to your farm the other day where you and Rachel, you invite folks out to come out.
And it's a working business that you all have.
And it's been a business for quite some time.
As a matter of fact, you developed the farm and the vineyard before you ever moved there in 1990.
Oh, yes.
Right.
Yes.
I fought the deer when we'd plant the deer and the cuttings and they'd sprout and we'd leave and be gone for two weeks and come back and there'd be nothing on there, nothing green.
Right.
The deer would move in and
And eat everything.
Right, because you lived in Freeport at the time.
You were still working, but you spent your vacation and your weekends.
Oh, yeah.
You'd make the drive over to this area to work the farm.
We put a compass on the map from Freeport, and we wanted no more than 200 miles.
And it was 190 miles from my house to the farm.
And you knew that route pretty well.
We could do that in four hours.
Very conveniently, we'd go up Friday evening and stay Saturday and end of Sunday and come home Sunday evening.
We started to talk the other day and we never finished the conversation.
I want you to do it now.
We're talking about your home that you live in.
And it had originally been a barracks that was connected to the prison camp that was connected to Hearn.
Is that right?
Yes.
Talk about that.
The original old building there, the people that owned the property,
They had bought one of the old barracks from the German prisoner of war camp in Hearn and installed it there on the property.
It still had the sliding barracks windows like I had in Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
And then they had added on to it, but in the same configuration.
It was about 55 foot long and 15 foot wide.
And so it had no internal wiring.
It had no internal plumbing.
It had no gas or anything there.
Ben worked in the maintenance department at Dow.
I'd go down and talk to the electrician expert and ask him what to do, and he'd tell me, and I'd go up over the weekend and
So I wired it.
I'd go underneath and drill through the plates and bring the wire in underneath and bring it to a plug and then go up and put the ceiling lights in.
It had no internal walls at all.
It had no windows.
It had openings, but it had plastic nailed over there.
My father, when he first saw that, he told my mother, he says, my God, what have those kids got into with something like that?
That just really threw him for a loop.
And you made a beautiful home out there.
Yeah, it had no water and everything.
We made a deal on the highway with a filling station.
He had a good well, and we asked him if we could fill up 10-gallon water cans, and that's what we drank out of and cooked out of.
Then I put a guttering system on the tin roof and collected the gutters into a 1,600-gallon cistern
connected my pump into that, and then I plumbed the house completely.
I had running water, had pressure system.
We didn't drink the water.
We drank wine, we drank beer, and we drank the water that we could borrow from the guy on the highway.
You started the vineyard in 1979.
1979, we planted about five acres, and we were all aglow with what we thought we could do.
We had
attended a wine grape seminar at A&M, and they were growing grapes all over West Texas.
And so the first recommendation by Dr. George Ray McEachern, who's still with A&M, the grape specialist, his recommendation was muscadines.
That's the only thing it'll grow.
Well, my mother-in-law gave me some
French-American hybrids and some muscadines, and that started us.
And then the next year, they decided there were a few grapevines that would grow here.
And so we started growing them and lost a lot of them because of Pierce's disease.
But then I found and stumbled into blueberries.
Tried peaches also, but they were difficult.
Lots of work, lots of work.
That's all there is on the farm is work, I'm finding out.
And see, I was raised in the city.
I've never been on a farm in my life.
As a matter of fact, you told me that when you started it, you thought about going into the winery business, but being in a dry county, it'd been tough to sell it.
Well, I couldn't sell it.
I'd have had to move it someplace.
It'd been illegal to sell it.
Yeah, illegal to sell it.
I get lots of folks that come up and
I want to buy some of my homemade wine.
And I said, no, no, no.
Oh, you just set one there and I'll leave some.
I said, no, forget it.
You can't do that.
I can't do that.
Because by law, I think you're able to make, what, 200 gallons a year?
I'm allowed to make 200 gallons a year as head of household.
Right.
The laws in Texas have changed quite a bit now since the winery groups have been really working on the legislature.
Uh-huh.
You can now sell wine if you're in a dry precinct.
Right.
You set up, you get a special permit for that one area.
And so it works out pretty well.
And now when I first got into the Texas Wine and Grape Growers Association, it was, I think, four or five wineries.
Now there's about 100 in Texas.
Yes, sir.
So it's really grown.
We've got just a couple of minutes left.
I'm gonna let you go ahead and throw in a quick commercial here.
You all invite people to come out and pick their own berries or you'll pick them for them for a little bit more cost, but sort of talk about what people and families are able to do out there.
Okay, we have blueberries,
Blackberries, raspberries, and grapes.
And then if I'm lucky in a year and have a decent garden, we'll sell tomatoes and other vegetables as folks come there.
We encourage folks to come pick.
They're easy to pick.
Blueberries have no thorns.
They have no spray.
We tell all the kids that come picking, hey, if you don't eat a few there,
You're not a good picker.
And boy, they smile.
And so we encourage that.
We have both the thornless and the thorn type blackberries.
And of course, raspberries have thorns, but they're not as bad.
We have them trellised up.
We have picnic facilities.
We've got a gazebo and a little lake.
If you want to come fishing, we'll let you come fishing, but you've got to turn all the fish loose.
You've got to turn that.
Can't take any with you.
And it's easy to get to.
I can tell you, folks, you go 79 north through Franklin and New Baden, past the Sanderson Farm feed facility out there, and you're just past that Sanderson Farm.
Turn right, there's a big sign there.
Matter of fact, the sign that you just saw there is right there on Highway 79.
And you go up there about two miles up the Rock Road and...
And you are.
It's just a beautiful place that you have.
Well, we think it is.
And you'd be surprised at the number of people that end up there just looking.
Saying, well, we wanted to see what the end of the road was.
So we say, come on out and sit down on the porch with us.
Yeah, you go up the road.
As a matter of fact, you get a sign that says you're almost there.
You're halfway there.
You're just about there.
You have two children.
You have five grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren.
And I know that you're very proud of them and wish we could talk more about them, but we are out of time.
But I appreciate your service and what you do, and it's been a pleasure.
Well, thank you very much.
I enjoyed it.
That's why we're in the people business out there.
Indeed.
And I thank you for asking me.
Thank you, Lawrence.
Lawrence and Rachel DeZavala have two children, five grandchildren and nine great-grandchildren, and a grand life on their beautiful farm north of Franklin.
They have earned it for their service, and we salute Sergeant Lawrence DeZavala as we do all veterans.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join me next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Silence.]
people that don't talk enough and I'll be about halfway through the show and I'll think, boy, I've got 15 more minutes here and I'm out of stuff to talk about.
And then I've got people that will get into this, you know, little bitty detail about things, you know, and I'll think I got it, you know, that's too much detail.
I got to get him, got to get more general because we're almost out of time, but you were perfect.
I don't get many perfect.
Hang on right there.
I'm going to do a couple of promos right here.
You don't have to do anything, but just look at that camera right there, and I'm going to look at it with you, and we're going to do a couple of promos here.
And they say that they're ready.
Okay.
Okay, I'm going to go ahead.
Here we go.
Lawrence DeZavala served his country as a radio operator and gunner aboard a B-24 of the Air Force's 379th bomber group in World War II.
He flew some 21 combat missions, mainly into Austria near the end of the war.
And now he and his wife, Rachel, enjoy the fruits of their careers, literally.
I'm Tom Turbiville, inviting you to meet Lawrence DeZavala on Veterans of the Valley, Friday at 8.30, Saturday and Sunday at 6.30, right here on KAMU-TV.
Well, it was right.
I looked at my clock and I bet that was right at 30.
We'll do another one.
Okay.
Lawrence DeZavala served his country as a radio operator and gunner aboard a B-24 of the Air Force's 379th bomber group in World War II.
He flew some 21 combat missions, mainly into Austria near the end of the war.
And now he and his wife, Rachel, enjoy the fruits of their career, literally.
I'm Tom Turbiville, inviting you to meet Lawrence DeZavala on Veterans of the Valley, Friday at 8.30, Saturday and Sunday at 6.30, right here on KAMU-TV.
[Silence.]